blog: vc is less stressful than bootstrapping (#4564)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/vc-or-bootstrap.md

---

> date: 2022-11-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-12-01
```

title: Raising money is less stressful than bootstrapping
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true

> categories: ["CEO diaries", "Inside PostHog"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categories: ["CEO diaries", "Inside PostHog", "Startups"]
```

author: ["james-hawkins"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-ceo-diary-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
---

Since PostHog raised Venture Capital (VC), we've had far less stress, and far more fun.

> There are lots of myths around what it's like run a business with VC funding - today, I'm here to dispel them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are lots of myths around what it's like run a business with VC funding – today, I'm here to dispel them.
```

> ## Do board meetings with VC companies involve them pressuring expansion at all costs?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myth #1: VC boards want growth at any cost
```

> ## Do board meetings with VC companies involve them pressuring expansion at all costs?

Author: I've put this here as it's the standard criticism i've seen online "vcs forcing them to do bad stuff" basically!

> Not for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This hasn't been our experience.
```

> Not for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This hasn't been our experience.
```

> This depends entirely on who joins your board, and how you've pitched to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The truth? It depends entirely on who joins your board, and how you've pitched to them.
```

Our experience has been an intense focus on finding the Ideal Customer Profile, and trying to focus as much as possible on the right users. Yes, we track revenue, signups and so on, but our board sees those as the output of building a great product for a specific set of end users. 

We have to prepare for the board meetings - now that we've got the process down, these usually take a few hours to do. We keep the majority of the meeting focused on one or two discussion topics rather than presenting an update. The guidance our board have given us has outweighed the cost of setting up and running these sessions every 3 months. And, frankly, if I know someone is marking my homework, it encourages me to do a better job. Sidenote: is this the real reason we're open source?!

> ## Control

Reviewer 2: Turn into a question for consistency? "Are you losing control of the company?"

Author: handled by andy's suggestion for new titles :)

> ## Control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myth #2: You lose control of your company
```

> Our board could pressure us to take certain decisions, but Tim (cofounder) and I are ultimately in control - after our series B, we've got control of three out of five seats. Control is something we can negotiate each time we fundraise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our board could pressure us to take certain decisions, but Tim (co-founder) and I are ultimately in control – after our series B, we've got control of three out of five seats. Control is something we can negotiate each time we fundraise.
```

> The fact we have plenty of runway, can pay everyone well, and have great people that ship stuff, means we have _more_ control, than a bootstrapped startup that _must_ generate revenue or go out of business.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fact we have plenty of runway, can pay everyone well, and have great people that ship stuff, means we have _more_ control than a bootstrapped startup that _must_ generate revenue or go out of business.
```

> Of course, this can easily result in a lack of discipline. However, it has helped us be able to get an open source project off the ground first, before focussing on revenue last summer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, this can easily result in a lack of discipline, but it helped us get an open source project off the ground first, before focussing on revenue last summer.
```

> ## Is fundraising a drag?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myth #3: Fundraising is a drag
```

There is a huge amount of variation. It all comes down to roughly these requirements:

> * clear explanation of what you're working on
> * fast progress being made
> * an idea that could be very big
> * proven team
> * good vc market conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A clear explanation of what you're working on
* Fast progress being made
* An idea that could be very big
* Proven team
* Good VC market conditions
```

I've intentionally not listed "a good network" as, whilst easier for some than others, I believe you can get this done as a byproduct of the above.

None of these are necessary, but the better you do against each of them, the less time you'll have to spend fundraising. Ironically, this means you'll have more time to focus on product, which means - the easier time you'll have fundraising.

> ## More bosses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myth #4: Your investors are your boss
```

Although you may retain control, if you fundraise, you've now got investors that you feel you _should_ report to.

> However, if you're building a bootstrapped company, you _still_ have to report to someone - your own team, if applicable, and your customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you're building a bootstrapped company, you _still_ have to report to someone – your own team, if applicable, and your customers.
```

> One more party has made a positive difference to us, but for others it can be bad - if your board asks for X, and users want Y, then you may have problems. This depends on the kind of people you raise from and your relationship with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One more party has made a positive difference to us, but for others it can be bad – if your board asks for X, and users want Y, then you may have problems. This depends on the kind of people you raise from and your relationship with them.
```

> There is a critical boss that VC removes though - you, to a certain extent. Personal finances can survive much longer when you have VC funding and when you're early stage. This can lead to a lack of discipline, as mentioned before, or it can lead to longer term thinking. It certainly feels less stressful. The fact you still need to be accountable for spending to your investors, we've found, does mean that when we spend a lot, it is intentional and reasoned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a critical boss that VC removes though – **you**, to a certain extent. Personal finances can survive much longer when you're early-stage but have  VC funding.

This can lead to a lack of discipline, as mentioned before, or it can lead to longer term thinking. But it's quantifiably less stressful. 

The fact you still need to be accountable for spending to your investors, we've found, means larger spending is intentional and reasoned.
```

For example, we pay 4 months notice if we let someone go. I doubt we'd have made that call if we were bootstrapped. We simply think it's cheaper to spend money here than to have an underperformer stay for longer because we feel bad. 

> ## How to make loads of money

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myth #5: It's IPO or bust
```

> There's a myth that you can only exit (sell your shares) from a VC backed company through an Initial Public Offering (IPO) or through selling the business.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a myth that you can only exit (sell your shares) from a VC-backed company through an Initial Public Offering (IPO), or through selling the business.
```

> The reality is that you can sell secondaries, but they aren't guaranteed. Most founders we know do this around the series B, or whenever the company is an obvious success. For employees, this normally starts a couple of rounds later. You can't sell anything like 100% of your stake each time - a few percent of what you own is the norm - VCs want you to remove some personal stress so you can focus on the business, but they still want you hungry for more. As the company gets bigger, this can go from removing any personal debt, to a life changing amount _whilst_ still running the company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reality is that you can sell secondaries, but they aren't guaranteed. Most founders we know do this around the series B, or whenever the company is an obvious success. For employees, this normally starts a couple of rounds later. 

You can't sell anything like 100% of your stake each time – a few percent of what you own is the norm – but VCs want you to remove some personal stress while keeping you hungry for more. As the company gets bigger, this can go from removing any personal debt, to a life changing amount _whilst_ still running the company.
```

Tim and I both think this path will give us the greatest happiness. It means removing financial stress from our lives, whilst being lucky enough to work on our mission of increasing the number of successful products in the world. It's a huge amount of fun for me to try to beat huge competitors by doing things "the right way" for developers.

> ## Getting started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myth #6: Get VC backing is stressful
```

If you want to get started with bootstrapping, you have two choices:

* start working on your new business before you quit your job
* spend your personal capital until you're profitable

Neither of these sounds like a relaxing exercise!

We started by bootstrapping. The reality at PostHog is that Tim and I committed 12 months of personal runway to getting off the ground. We simply paid ourselves nothing for the first 6 months. That created stress - we had to save up ahead of time, then had to spend as little as possible in our personal lives.

Then we got into [YCombinator](https://ycombinator.com). The personal stress evaporated and we focused 100% on the business.

What I didn't realize at the time is many teams will raise a pre-seed round, ahead of real traction or having a team - this reduces the barrier of needing a bunch of savings.

> ## Some companies are a terrible fit for VC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Truth #1: Some companies ARE a terrible fit for VC
```

> First, you need to want to build something very, very big. You will never be able to deliberately relax and run things as a lifestyle business once you're at $1M ARR or more, for example. Are you going to want to push further when you've no financial need to do so?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those are some myths dispelled, but this doesn't invalidate bootstrapping and some companies definitely **shouldn't** seek VC funding.

First, you need to want to build something very, very big. You will never be able to deliberately relax and run things as a lifestyle business once you're at $1M ARR or more, for example. Are you going to want to push further when you've no financial need to do so?
```

> Second, the style of product you want to build may _require_ more capital. With hindsight, we've built a really wide platform with lots of products inside it. The innovation is starting on an open source base, and integrating all the tools that customers need to build a more successful product. That's an awful lot of stuff to build. We also believed that our paid self hosted product would be 90%+ of our revenue, so we'd need to build a free and a paid product on top (although that later turned out not to be true...)

Reviewer: Unless I'm misreading it, this point seems at odds with the title of the section?

Author: clarified as this was confusingly worded!

> ## There are terrible reasons for raising money...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Truth #2: There are terrible reasons for raising money...
```

> Although there may be exceptions, here are standard ways to fail:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although there may be exceptions, here are some standard ways to fail:
```

* You want to hire people to find product market fit for you
* You want to hire people to do the early sales for you

> * You want to raise money because of your ego

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You're seeking a sky-high valuation
```

Take or leave this, but in infers the same thing.

Author: i'll leave it (but thank you for the other suggestions here!)

> ## ... but for me it was less stressful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why VC = less stress (for me)
```

> Running any company is usually a marathon - I believe that looking after yourself let's you in turn look after users better. That often means raising money.

Author: i've added this, thanks

---

> date: 2022-12-02

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-12-05
```
